# Anderson vs. Kitchens Response
DJ Olson 2/25/20

## Question

In Anderson’s 2008 article he describes how the data deluge is serving to make the scientific theory obsolete. Kitchen provides a rebuttal to Anderson’s argument that theory is dead with his supposition that in fact we have entered a fourth paradigm. What do you think? Do you believe that theory is dead? Do you think we have indeed entered a paradigm shifting revolution for how we describe, analyze and understand the world?

## Response

  Anderson seems to believe that the availability of data has made theory obsolete. This is because massive search engines with  analytical tools are able to return a massive amount of results based on searches. Oftentimes, statistics gathered through users of the database are able to interpret which sources are better in ways theory and human analysis could not. In essence his argument is that no theory of human behavior can describe why people do what they do. “The point is they do it, and we can track and measure it with unprecedented fidelity. With enough data, the numbers speak for themselves.” We simply have to monitor human behavior, and then through the data collected we will be able to predict and analyze trends to yield better results than any human derived theory or analysis could.

  Kitchen disagrees with Anderson stating that theory is not dead, a new kind has simply arisen. As Kitchen puts it, “Big Data analytics enables an entirely new epistemological approach for making sense of the world; rather than testing a theory by analysing relevant data, new data analytics seek to gain insights ‘born from the data’.” Kitchen believes that big data is not a destruction of theory, but rather an extension to those already developed. Instead of using data to simply test theories, we are now able to form theories from data. I think that this reflects a massive shift in theory development, but not its destruction. The human aspect in forming theory is obviously diminished. Pretty soon we may not even need people to think about solving problems, but instead just task people with gathering massive amounts of data on problems, and then waiting for data interpretation software to come up with solutions based on trend analysis. However, I do not think that human theory will ever entirely be “destroyed,” because we will always need people to test solutions. Whenever you are dealing with complex problems there are going to be unforeseen issues that data software may overlook. The nuisances of  problems related to humans are so times best dealt with by other humans. Thus, I would agree with Kitchens that theory has and will continue to change, but I do not think it is destroyed, nor do I think humans will ever be entirely unnecessary for developing theory. 
