# Blumenstock Response
DJ Olson
1/28/20

  Joshua Blumenstock recognizes the many potential benefits of data science. However, he is also wary of the potential pitfalls big data presents. Data science is a field in which inovation often outpaces understanding. With the spread and growth of mobile phone use, the ammount of data that is able to be collected from individuals is constantly increasing. And thus, pressing global issues are able to be addressed quickly using the plethora of imformation now available to us. But, what often happens when invoation outpaces understanding is the quick and seemingly obvious solutions big data leads us to are not always right. 
 
 For example, the ability to monitor mobile phone use in Sub-Saharan Africa has allowed for data analysts to create "high resolution maps of crop yields and child malnutrition." Using machine learning and trend analysis, analysts recognized that wealthier people tended to make more international phone calls, and in turn, were able to recognize that poorer people are more likely to live in homes with thatched roofs. In Africa, only about 8% of money and resources actually reach those who need it, the rest gets swalloed up along the way. Thus the immediate solution seemed obvious, focus poverty relief initiatives  more accurately using the computer generated maps so the money and resources reach those who need them most. However, what machine learning does not take into account is the human aspect of issues. Wealthy people who were used to benefitting from aid in the past started creating thatched roof homes next to their larger iron roofed compounds to trick the satelite mapping systems, and thuse as is often true with big data, it "bolstered those who are already empowered rather than vulnerable people."
  
  Additionally their is no regulation placed on those using big data, and the private sector is able to use it to benefit themselves and the rich get richer. Mobile phone data is able to create credit score predictions, and companies are able to quickly issues digital loans that often result in those taking them becoming trapped in debt cycles. Furthermore, because the data is so new it can be biased and flat out incorrect. People are now aware that data analysis is determining things such as who gets aid, so they are able to change their mobile phone use to trick the system. And because big data is so new and the algorithms are being trained on sometimes biased data, underrepresented groups who need the most help can often become even more marginalized. 
  
  Thus, when presented with big data's potential and drawbacks Blumensock understood that the current trajectory was not the correct way to move forward. The use of big data needs to be adjusted in order to truly benefit society. To address this he came up with a three pronged approach that would attempt to solve many of the pitfalls we see today with big data; customize, validate, and collaborate. We need to customize our algorithms rather than using old ones to analyze new problems. Today we see alogrithms that are used by Facebook to target specific ads to people being used to target relief efforts to poverty stricken regions. Instead we should make custom algorithms that will more correctly recognizes issues we create them to spot. Additionally we shouldn't simply replace old information with big data. We should pair big data with old data collection methods like surveys to validate our findings. Finally, we need to collaborate more effectivley with the private sector that often collects and uses big data. Instead of companies using it to benefit themselves monetarily, we need to standardize its collection and use to it can help people in the way it has the potential to. 
  
The potential of big data is unparalled but using it in the right way is always going to be a balancing act. We need to move forward in the correct ways without falling into the pitfalls that have already been recognized and will likely continue to pop up. Big data tells us so much about people and our use of it needs to be transparent. We can't allow for data to be manipulated to further take advantage of those it is intended to aid. While the intent of big data often seems good, both ingorance and manipulation can often change how effective it is. Data tells us a lot about patterns but it doesn't take into acccount the human aspect of life. It can't sense when algorithms are being manipulated or when local cultures conflict with the aid it suggests. So, like any innovative solution, it needs to be taken with a grain of salt. Big data has the potential to do great things, but the approach we take when using it will determine wether or not we reach the intended result.
